# Release Notes v1.58

## Upstream Changes

Please check the following sites for upstream release notes:

- [Gardener releases](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases)
- [Gardener-community charts releases](https://github.com/gardener-community/gardener-charts/releases)

## 23KE Changes and Upgrade Path

- Before update
  - ingress-nginx now ships as part of 23ke with a required custom configuration for certificate management. This is the only supported ingress from now, and will be updated with future 23ke versions. Remove other ingress-nginx installations before updating.
  - cert-manager now ships as part of 23ke and will also be updated with future 23ke versions. Remove other cert-manager installations before updating.
  - gardeners external-dns-management component now ships as part of 23ke and creates/updates DNS records with the right Ingress/Service IP. If installed, remove external-dns before updating
  - Create new 23ke-config secret
  - The 23ke installation has been restructured. Before updating, suspend both 23ke-base-config and 23ke-base-install Kustomizations.
  - The default subdomain for the gardenlet seedConfig.spec.dns.ingressDomain has been set to "internal". This field is immutable for existing seeds, so to continue using your existing ingressDomain you need to add
	```yaml
	apiVersion: v1
	kind: Secret
	metadata:
	 name: 23ke-config
	 namespace: flux-system
	type: Opaque
	stringData:
	   values.yaml: |
	   ...
		gardenlet.ingressDomain: ingress
	   ...
	```

- After the update
  - flux now ships as part of 23ke and will also be updated with future 23ke versions. You can remove an existing gotk-componentes.yaml from your env config.
  - cert-manager is no longer used for letsencrypt. You can remove the default-issuer ClusterIssuer from your 23ke-config folder.
	- Remove all environment variables and postBuild/env substitution from your 23ke-config, if you do not need them anymore. If you find no more environment variables in your 23ke-config, you can delete the `23ke-env-substitution` `Secret`
	- Delete all old base-config `ConfigMaps`, and delete 23ke-base-config and 23ke-base-install Kustomization. Adjust the `dependsOn` for your own Kustomizations like 23ke-env-garden-content.
	```shell
	kubectl delete kustomization 23ke-base-config
	kubectl delete kustomization 23ke-base-install
	kubectl delete configmap -A -l kustomize.toolkit.fluxcd.io/name=23ke-base-config
	```

- Other changes
  - gardeners cert-management component now ships as part of 23ke.
